---
title: FORD
subtitle: Fortran Documentation Generator
author: Peter Hill
tags: Fortran documentation python
software:
    url: https://github.com/Fortran-FOSS-Programmers/ford
    github: https://github.com/Fortran-FOSS-Programmers/ford
    licence: GPLv3
layout: software
---

FORD is a documentation generator for Fortran projects, and is widely
used by the scientific Fortran community. It is similar to the popular
Doxygen tool, but is designed from the ground up for Fortran. At the
time of writing, FORD has 280 stars on GitHub and over 100 forks.

The current maintainers found they had less and less time to devote to
FORD, with the result that it had been more than two years since the
last release. Because this is an important community project, we have
picked up maintenance of the code to ensure that it remains available
and useful for everyone.

The first thing I did was to review the current state of the
project. Pull requests and bug reports had started to pile up, and
there was a rather unfortunate lack of tests. The packaging with
`setup.py` was a little bit out of date, although the Python community
seems to change its mind on how to do this about twice a year!

I went through each pull request (PR), tidying up any particularly
egregious errors before merging them. For some PRs the community had
already had some discussion as to its appropriateness, which made this
job a lot easier.

Next, I used the [black](https://black.readthedocs.io/en/stable/)
Python formatter to format the entire codebase to a consistent
style. I really like black due to its lack of configuration options,
which heads off arguments about style -- just use black! I also set
this up as a GitHub Action, meaning that formatting is now
automatically taken care of.

After that, I began writing tests using
[pytest](https://docs.pytest.org/). I started out by going through the
PRs that fixed bugs, writing tests for them that failed without the
fix and checking the PR did indeed fix the bug. One of the major
difficulties of writing tests on code that wasn't designed with tests
in mind is just getting the correct data structures set up. Here's
where pytest's fixtures came in useful. Writing a fixture allowed me
to pull out common setup code from each test function into a separate
function that ran before each individual test.

In the two months we have been helping maintain FORD we have:

- reviewed and merged 33 pull requests,
- fixed 20 bugs,
- closed another 21 issues,
- added 57 tests, and
- released 1 minor version and 4 bug releases!

We also added GitHub Actions to automatically run the tests, apply
[black](https://black.readthedocs.io/en/stable/) formatting, and
publish the packages on [PyPI](https://pypi.org) when new releases are
created.
