---
title: tokamesh
subtitle: Tokamak meshing utilities
author: Peter Hill
tags: python tokamak meshing
software:
    url: https://github.com/C-bowman/tokamesh
    github: https://github.com/C-bowman/tokamesh
    licence: MIT
    author: Chris Bowman
layout: software
---

Tokamesh is a Python package for generating and working with triangular meshes
for tomographic inversion problems in tokamaks. Its features include barycentric
linear-interpolation, and local mesh refinement, both of which enable creation
of smaller meshes with a lower number of basis functions than more traditional
approaches.

This is the second of two projects that I undertook for Dr. Bowman. By the time
I started working on tokamesh, Chris had already implemented some of the
features and techniques that I demonstrated in the first project,
[inference-tools](/2021/11/05/inference-tools.html), including expanding and
automating the unit tests, and modernising and automating the packaging: an
early success for PlasmaFAIR!

As a result, tokamesh was in very good state when I started on it, and as such,
there wasn't a great deal for me to do. I expanded the test suite, not just
increasing the coverage, but also increasing the specificity by adding tests for
functions already covered indirectly through being called by other functions
being directly tested.

This left one last interesting thing to tackle: the use of a C library,
[`triangle`][triangle]. The existing way this was used was to compile `triangle`
as an executable, write some input text files to disk, run `triangle`, and
finally read in and parse some text files back to `numpy` arrays.

The downside to this approach is it relies on a particular hardcoded compiler
(`gcc`) being available, and so is not terribly portable, and would probably not
work on Apple or Windows machines. A secondary thing to be concerned about is
reading and writing text files to disk can be quite slow, especially for large
files. The solution is to use [Cython][cython] to interface directly with the
library, and distribute a pre-compiled library.

Cython-ising the `triangle` interface consists of four parts. The first part is
a `.pxd` file, which is essentially a Python version of the C `triangle.h`
header file, containing a definition of the `struct` used for input and output
to the library, and the function signature of the entry point.

The second part is a `.pyx` file which provides the actual interface between the
Python code and the C library. Here, instead of writing `numpy` arrays to text
files, I pass them directly in memory to `triangle` (actually this not quite
true: they need to be manipulated somewhat to get them into the correct memory
layout, but once that's done we can pass them by address). This ended up being
the hardest bit to implement, mostly due to the `triangle` documentation being
quite vague about exactly which parts of the input and output structures need
allocating, and how they should be laid out in memory. Once I'd cracked that
nut, the resulting code was shorter and cleaner. It also had the added advantage
of avoiding truncation and rounding errors when reading/writing floating point
numbers to/from disk!

The last two parts are related to the packaging. One reason I wanted to use
Cython to interface to `triangle` was that it can compile the C code as part of
the package. This requires a small addition to `setup.py` to list the Cython
extensions to be built, their source files, libraries that need linking, and
preprocessor macros. Now, when we run `setup.py` or `pip install`, the
`triangle` library and our Cython interface are compiled automatically. The very
last part is to automate this in CI.

Chris had already added the GitHub action from `inference-tools` to publish the
package. I modified this to use [cibuildwheel][cibuildwheel] to build the
package for Linux, Windows, and Mac simultaneously, and for multiple Python
versions too (in addition to a "usual" source package). This means that users of
`tokamesh` can install it without needed to compile the `triangle` library
themselves.

With these changes, `tokamesh` is now more portable, more readable, and
hopefully a little bit faster too!

[cibuildwheel]: https://cibuildwheel.readthedocs.io/en/stable/
[cython]: https://cython.org
[triangle]: http://www.cs.cmu.edu/~quake/triangle.html
