---
title: FEDM
subtitle: A finite element electric discharge modelling code
author: Liam Pattinson
tags: finite element electric discharge
software:
    licence: LGPL3.0
    author: Aleksandar Jovanovic
layout: software
---

The [Finite Element Discharge Modelling code][FEDM] (FEDM) is a collection of functions
to assist in the simulation of electric discharges using finite element methods, created
by Aleksandar Jovanovic at the Leibniz Institute for Plasma Science and Technology.
Utilising the  [FEniCS][FEniCS] finite element library and its Python API
[Dolfin][dolfin], FEDM is able to simulate a large number of particle species and the
reactions that may occur between them during an electrical discharge. These systems can
involve a large number of source terms, some of which may be stiff in nature, and coding
these by hand can be very laborious and error-prone. FEDM aims to simplify the
development of these models.

FEniCS can be difficult to get running, in part because it has no officially maintained
Anaconda distribution; the recommended ways to obtain it are to either perform a
system-wide install using Debian's `apt` package manager, or to run all FEniCS code
within a Docker container. Complicating matters further, FEniCS has recently been
updated to version 0.4, which is not backwards compatible with the legacy versions. As
the new version is not yet widely used and may be unstable, FEDM is designed to run on
the legacy v0.3 Docker container.

Despite the difficulty of working with FEniCS, the steps required to get FEDM to run on
a Docker container were well explained in the project README, so it was relatively easy
to start work on the library. Our work on the project included an upgrade to allow FEDM
to be installed using `pip`, allowing it to be easily run and tested from anywhere on
the system, and preparing the package for a potential future public release. Further
updates included improved runtime error checking, some refactoring to avoid repeated
code segments, and some changes to simplify the control flow. The provided examples were
also modified to create some integrated tests that can be run using pytest.

A future upgrade for FEDM may include a custom Docker image that provides FEDM
pre-installed alongside FEniCS, as this would make it easier for others to use the
software, and it could be used for automated testing using a CI service such as Github
Actions.

As of September 2022, FEDM is not a publicly accessible library, although this may
change within the year.

[FEDM]: https://zenodo.org/record/3839712#.YyL16tXMKV4
[FEniCS]: https://fenicsproject.org
[dolfin]: https://fenicsproject.org/olddocs/dolfin/latest/python/
