---
title: Pyloidal
subtitle: A small utility library for tokamak coordinate transformations
author: Liam Pattinson
tags: python utility tokamak cocos coordinate transformation
software:
    github: https://github.com/PlasmaFAIR/pyloidal
    licence: MIT
    author: Liam Pattinson, Peter Hill
layout: software
---

Pyloidal is a small utility library which may be used to perform tokamak coordinate
transformations. A wide range of coordinate conventions are used throughout the MCF
plasma physics software ecosystem, so it is often necessary to convert the outputs from
one software package to match the convention used by another. The conventions themselves
are formalised and assigned a unique identifier by the tokamak COordinate COnventionS
([COCOS][cocos]). Pyloidal is capable of both converting from one COCOS convention to
another, or determining which convention is currently in use. In cases where the
convention is ambiguous, Pyloidal returns all possibilities.

This functionality was needed by [Pyrokinetics]({% post_url 2022-07-04-pyrokinetics %}) in order
to convert equilibria from G-EQDSK files into consistent coordinate conventions. The
basic algorithms were available in [OMAS][omas], but it seemed wasteful to import such a
large library, itself with many dependencies, for the sake of just two functions. Rather
than re-implementing these functions in Pyrokinetics directly, we decided to create this
small spin-off library so that other projects may also make use of them.

The feature set of Pyloidal is currently very small, but other utilities may be added in
future if the need arises.

[cocos]: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cpc.2012.09.010
[omas]: https://github.com/gafusion/omas
