---
title: SUMMIT
subtitle: Tokamak start-up via microwave current-drive
author: Liam Pattinson
tags: electron bernstein wave plasma startup magnetic confinement fusion microwave
software:
   author: Erasmus du Toit
layout: software
---

SUMMIT is a new software package developed at the University of York which can
predict the behaviour of magnetically confined plasmas under the influence of
microwave-induced current drive during start-up. A central solenoid is the
typical method for driving the initial currents, but these devices take up
valuable space in the central column and are vulnerable to neutron irradiation.
It has been proposed that future reactors may instead make use of microwave
launchers around the outer wall to drive currents, as these are more resistant
to radiation and will free up space for the breeding blanket or other
components.

SUMMIT was developed as a PhD code, and is comprised of a mix of Fortran and
Python. The Fortran code is split into three parts, each compiling to a separate
executable which must be run in sequence. Each executable requires its own input
file, and although there are many similarities between these input files, they
are not mutually compatible. The Python portion of the code coordinates the
running of this pipeline and simplifies the user interface.

The majority of our time on SUMMIT was spent upgrading the Fortan portion of the
code to make use of modern best practices and to merge the three Fortran
sub-programs into a single consistent program. Each sub-program previously
shared some key data structures, but code was duplicated between each of them,
often with minor discrepancies. The aim of this merge was to increase code
reuse, improve maintainability, and to unify the input file format. This proved
to be a challenging task, as sometimes small edits would necessitate cascading
upstream changes. The widespread use of module-scope variables also made it
difficult to track the overall control flow, as many key calculations occured as
function/subroutine side-effects. Ultimately, all three sub-programs were
unified, but only two of the three sub-programs were fully refactored to an
object-oriented design free from module-scope data, while the third was only
partially refactored.

The build-system was updated from a collection of Makefiles to instead use
[CMake][cmake], as this is portable over a wider range of platforms and permits
easier integration between Python and Fortran via [scikit-build-core][skbuild].
The Python portion of the code previously required the user to enter the
top-level project directory in order for Python to find all of the required
modules and the compiled Fortran executables, so we upgraded this so that the
project could instead be installed with `pip` and run from anywhere on the
user's system. Most of the existing Python workflows have not yet been updated
to use the upgraded Fortran, so further work is required here.

Finally, the Fortran testing framework was migrated from
[naturalFRUIT][naturalfruit] to [pfUnit][pfunit], as the former appears to be
unmaintained while the latter is under active development. pfUnit also offers
CMake support and has powerful pre-processing capabilities to reduce the amount
of boilerplate needed to set up tests. Additional Python tests were added using
[pytest][pytest], and these primarily compare the results of full simulation
runs using the upgraded code to results gathered using the previous code.

[cmake]: https://cmake.org/
[skbuild]: https://scikit-build-core.readthedocs.io/en/stable/
[naturalfruit]: https://github.com/cibinjoseph/naturalFRUIT
[pfunit]: https://github.com/Goddard-Fortran-Ecosystem/pFUnit
[pytest]: https://docs.pytest.org/en/stable/
