---
title: FELTOR
subtitle: Numerical methods for edge and scrape-off layer simulations
author: Liam Pattinson
tags: C++ MPI Cuda CMake tokamak edge SoL gyrofluid
software:
    url: https://feltor-dev.github.io/
    github: https://github.com/feltor-dev/feltor
    license: MIT
    author: Matthias Wiesenberger
layout: software
---

[FELTOR][feltor] (Full-F ELectromagnetic code in TORoidal geometry) is a
physics simulation package that uses discontinuous galerkin methods to solve
plasma physics problems. As a modular system, it has a large range of potential
applications, but it is primarily used to investigate plasma turbulence via
gyrofluid equations.

One of the most impressive features of FELTOR is its use of Nvidia's
[Thrust][thrust] library to achieve multithreaded or GPU parallelisation.
Combinging this with MPI-based multiprocessing, FELTOR can be efficiently run
on a wide range of machines from personal laptops up to the latest GPU-based
supercomputers.

Our work on FELTOR was focused on upgrading its build system to make use of
[CMake][cmake], as it was previously built using a collection of Makefiles that
limited its portability across some systems. Upgrading to CMake also allowed us
to streamline the dependency management of FELTOR, as previously the user was
required to install a number of external libraries to a precise location in
order to compile the project. With the upgrades, these libraries could be
automatically downloaded from GitHub and installed to a local `build/`
directory, reducing the installation steps to just two instructions on the
command line:

```bash
cmake -Bbuild . -DFELTOR_FETCH_DEPS=ON
cmake --build build
```

In addition, FELTOR's tests and benchmarks were previously built one-by-one via
its Makefiles, and this meant they weren't always being checked for
compatibility with the latest code changes. With CMake, it was easy to define
custom targets so that all tests could be built with one command:

```bash
cmake --build build --target dg_tests
```

Combining this with the automatic dependency management, it was then
straightforward to add CI jobs to ensure all tests would build correctly across
a range of platforms and for all combinations of parallelisation strategies.
Following our recommendations, Matthias also upgraded FELTOR's tests to use the
[Catch2][catch2] testing framework. Previously, the tests would require manual
inspection to see if they were passing or failing, but with this upgrade it
became possible to run all tests in a CI job (although sadly we weren't able to
set up GPU testing with the GitHub action runners).

Finally, Matthias updated FETLOR's dependencies to later versions, and has
since made significant further upgrades to the CMake system, including the use
of [CPM][cpm], a CMake package manager that combines the features of
`find_package` and `FetchContent` into a single cohesive dependency manager.

[feltor]: https://github.com/feltor-dev/feltor
[cmake]: https://cmake.org/
[thrust]: https://developer.nvidia.com/thrust
[catch2]: https://github.com/catchorg/Catch2
[cpm]: https://github.com/cpm-cmake/CPM.cmake
